[BLOG] Performance optimizations for the OpenSearch security layer (#3890)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-07-30-optimized-privilege-evaluation.md

---
layout: post
title: "Performance optimizations for the OpenSearch security layer"
category: blog
tags: [performance, opensearch-3-0, opensearch-3-1]
authors:
    - nbandener
date: 2025-07-30
categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: performance, OpenSearch 3.0, OpenSearch 3.1, OpenSearch performance, OpenSearch security, access control performance
meta_description: Performance improvements in OpenSearch 2.19, 3.0, and 3.1 significantly boost the efficiency of the security layer, including role evaluation, DLS/FLS, and user object handling. We take a look inside.
---

> When we are discussing performance optimizations in OpenSearch, we are usually focused on the processing of the actual data: we are looking at algorithms and data structures to improve the time a query takes; or to improve the indexing throughput.

Reviewer: Done

However, there are also other processes going on in an OpenSearch cluster which might not be so obvious, but which can have a significant impact on its performance: a very significant one is the security layer, which is responsible for performing authentication, authorization and enforcing access controls. As we will see in this article, especially the evaluation of security roles in order to derive the available privileges can sometimes be surprisingly complex and CPU time consuming. 

Thus, we have worked in the past year on a number of different optimizations in the OpenSearch security layer; these have been gradually released in OpenSearch 2.19, OpenSearch 3.0 and OpenSearch 3.1. More work is in the pipeline.

> 

Reviewer: @nibix Can you please address? Thanks!

Let’s have a look at the first chart - it shows the benchmark results for bulk indexing operations with 10 bulk items per request. The horizontal axis represents the number of indexes present on the cluster. The vertical axis represents the measured throughput in documents per second. The complexity of the role configuration is indicated by the line color; green represents the user with full privileges. Yellow colors represent users with limited privileges; the darker the yellow, the more roles are assigned to the user. The blue line on the top represents a test run performed with a super admin TLS certificate; using this certificate will by-pass most of the security layer. Thus, it can be interpreted as an upper threshold for the theoretically possible throughput.

> ![Benchmark for bulk indexing on OpenSearch 2.18](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-07-30-optimized-privilege-evaluation/benchmark-bulk-baseline.svg)

Author: Image font size has been increased

We see here the throughput of a search operation on 20 indexes. Again, the dashed line represents the old version, and the solid line represents the optimized version. The horizontal axis does now represent the number of user attributes, i.e., the size of the user object. We can see: Users with 10 attributes see a 21% improvement. Users with 100 attributes get a throughput that is 39% higher than the on the old version.

The user object optimizations have been recently released with OpenSearch 3.1.0.

## Improved index resolution

And this is not the end yet. We are now working on the another facet of the security layer: In the [Index pattern resolution improvements project](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security/issues/5367) we are now working on the code that tells the security layer which indexes an action request is about to access. We believe to gain further performance improvements by doing optimizations here.

## Conclusion

The recent OpenSearch versions bring huge performance improvements on the security layer. Especially if you have a cluster with many indexes, getting the most recent OpenSearch version will bring you many advantages. 

> From the perspective of a software engineer, the results show: it takes the right data structures and with the right algorithms to max out the potential of your infrastructure. OpenSearch and Lucene are actually full of such great applications of efficient algorithms and data structures, especially in the indexing and search core. It is really cool that we could move even more forward now.

Author: @natebower @kolchfa-aws 

As the first sentence was already mentioning general benefits, I have refined it and made it more concrete:

> The most recent OpenSearch versions include significant performance improvements to the security layer. Especially if you have a cluster with many indexes, upgrading to the most recent OpenSearch version will bring you a higher indexing throughput, a reduced query latency and a generally reduced cluster CPU utilization.

Does that work for you?

meta_description: Performance improvements in OpenSearch 2.19, 3.0, and 3.1 significantly boost the efficiency of the security layer, including role evaluation, DLS/FLS, and user object handling. We take a look inside.
---

When discussing performance optimizations in OpenSearch, we usually focus on the processing of actual data: we look at algorithms and data structures to improve the amount of time a query takes to run or to improve the indexing throughput.

However, other processes running in an OpenSearch cluster might not be so obvious but can have a significant impact on its performance: a very significant one is the security layer, which is responsible for performing authentication, authorization, and enforcing access controls. As you will see in this post, the evaluation of security roles in order to derive the available privileges can sometimes be surprisingly complex and time consuming. 

Over the past year, we have worked on a number of different optimizations to the OpenSearch security layer; these have been gradually released in OpenSearch 2.19, OpenSearch 3.0, and OpenSearch 3.1. More work is in the pipeline.

> ## Quick overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overview
```

> In this article, we cover the following optimizations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we cover the following optimizations:
```

> - The [optimized privilege evaluation](#optimized-privilege-evaluation) uses highly efficient, hash table–based logic, reducing performance degradation as the number of indexes grows. This is especially important on clusters with 300 or more indices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Optimized privilege evaluation](#optimized-privilege-evaluation) uses highly efficient, hash-table-based logic, reducing performance degradation as the number of indexes grows. This is especially important for clusters with 300 or more indexes.
```

> - The [optimized document- and field-level security](#optimized-privilege-evaluation-for-document--and-field-level-security) reduces internal cluster communication traffic by moving privilege evaluation to the shard level. This is relevant whenever DLS restrictions are in effect for a user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Optimized document- and field-level security](#optimized-privilege-evaluation-for-document--and-field-level-security) reduces internal cluster communication traffic by moving privilege evaluation to the shard level. This is relevant whenever document-level security restrictions are in effect for a user.
```

> - The [user object optimizations](#user-object-optimizations) bring generally high performance benefits; still, especially users with many roles and attributes will observe noticeable improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Additional [user object optimizations](#user-object-optimizations) provide generally high performance benefits; users with many roles and attributes will especially observe noticeable improvements.
```

> Upgrading to OpenSearch 3.1 ensures you benefit from all of these optimizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrading to OpenSearch 3.1 ensures that you benefit from all of these optimizations.
```
